Mexico was represented at the OTI Festival 1976 with the song "De que te quiero, te quiero", written by Rubén Fuentes, Eduardo Magallanes, and Mario Molina Montes, and performed by Gilberto Valenzuela. The Mexican participating broadcaster, Televisa, selected its entry through a national televised competition with several phases. The song, that was performed in position 6, placed 6th out of 19 competing entries, with 8 votes. In addition, Televisa was also the host broadcaster and staged the event at the Teatro Juan Ruiz de Alarcón of the Centro de Convenciones in Acapulco, after winning the previous edition with the song "La felicidad" by Gualberto Castro.
Televisa held a national competition with four televised qualifying rounds and a final to select its entry for the 5th edition of the OTI Festival. This fifth edition of the National OTI Festival featured 32 songs, of which eight reached the final.
The shows were held at Televisa San Ángel studios in Mexico City, were presented by Raúl Velasco, and were broadcast on Canal 2 within the show Siempre en Domingo. The musical director was Chucho Ferrrer, who conducted the orchestra when required. Hermanos Zavala, the single mixed backing choir, were credited on the songs they accompanied.
The four qualifying rounds were held on Sundays 5, 12, 19, and 26 September 1976. The eight highest-scoring entries among the 32 competing advanced to the final.
The eight-song final was held on Sunday 3 October 1976. The winner was "De que te quiero, te quiero", written by Rubén Fuentes, Eduardo Magallanes, and Mario Molina Montes, and performed by Gilberto Valenzuela. The festival ended with a reprise of the winning entry.
On 30 October 1976, the OTI Festival was held at the Teatro Juan Ruiz de Alarcón of the Centro de Convenciones in Acapulco, hosted by Televisa, and broadcast live throughout Ibero-America. Gilberto Valenzuela performed "De que te quiero, te quiero" in position 6, placing 6th out of 19 competing entries, with eight votes.