The 2026 Big 12 Conference football season will be the 31st season of the Big 12 Conference football taking place during the 2026 NCAA Division I FBS football season.
The 2026 Big 12 Championship Game will be played at AT&T Stadium in Arlington, Texas on December 4, 2026.  The two top teams will play for the conference's automatic berth into the 2026–27 College Football Playoff.
The 2026 Big 12 media days was held on July 7–8, 2026 at the Ford Center at The Star in Frisco, Texas.
Offensive Player of the Year: LJ Martin, RB, BYU, Sr.
Defensive Player of the Year: A.J. Holmes Jr., DL, Texas Tech, Sr.
Newcomer of the Year: Drew Mestemaker, QB, Oklahoma State, RS-So.
There were four coaching changes before the 2026 season. On November 25, 2025, Eric Morris was hired out of North Texas as the 25th head coach at Oklahoma State to replace Mike Gundy who was fired.  On December 4, 2025 Texas A&M offensive coordinator Collin Klein was named the 36th head coach at Kansas State to replace Chris Klieman who retired.  On December 5, 2025, Jimmy Rogers was named the 34th head football coach at Iowa State following former coach Matt Campbell who accepted the head coaching position at Penn State.  On December 13, 2025, Utah defensive coordinator Morgan Scalley was promoted to head coach following Kyle Whittingham stepping down and then later accepting the head coaching position at Michigan.
Note: All stats current through the completion of the 2025 season
Rankings reflect those of the AP poll for weeks 0 through 9. Rankings from Week 10 until the end of the Season reflect those of the College Football Playoff Rankings.
Rankings are from CFP rankings.  All times Central Time Zone. Big-12 teams shown in bold.
This is a list of the Power Four conferences teams (ACC, Big Ten, Notre Dame and SEC).
The following games include Big 12 teams competing against teams from The American, CUSA, MAC, Mountain West, Pac-12 or Sun Belt.
The Football Championship Subdivision comprises 13 conferences and two independent programs.
The Big 12 Conference has television contracts with ESPN and FOX, which allow games to be broadcast across ABC, ESPN, ESPN2, ESPNU, FOX, FS1 and FS2 and TNT Sports. Streaming broadcasts for games under Big 12 control are streamed on ESPN+. Games under the control of other conferences fall under the contracts of the opposing conference.
The following individuals received postseason honors as voted by the Big 12 Conference coaches at the end of the season.
Currently, the NCAA compiles consensus all-America teams in the sports of Division I-FBS football and Division I men's basketball using a point system computed from All-America teams named by coaches associations or media sources. The system consists of three points for a first-team honor, two points for second-team honor, and one point for third-team honor. Honorable mention and fourth team or lower recognitions are not accorded any points. College Football All-American consensus teams are compiled by position and the player accumulating the most points at each position is named first team consensus all-American. Currently, the NCAA recognizes All-Americans selected by the AP, AFCA, FWAA, TSN, and the WCFF to determine Consensus and Unanimous All-Americans. Any player named to the First Team by all five of the NCAA-recognized selectors is deemed a Unanimous All-American.
2026 Athlon Sports College Football's Postseason All-America Team
The following players earned All-Big 12 honors. Any teams showing (_) following their name are indicating the number of All-Big 12 Conference Honors awarded to that university for 1st team and 2nd team respectively.
AP/ST = All-Purpose/Special Teams Player (not a kicker or returner)