Events in the year 2026 in Burkina Faso.
President of the Patriotic Movement for Safeguard and Restoration: Ibrahim Traoré
The government bans US nationals from the country.
An initiative to digitalize the justice system is announced.
5 January – The government announces that it had foiled a coup plot.
10 January – Former government minister Yolande Viviane Compaoré is found murdered inside her residence in Ouagadougou.
17–18 January – Eleven police officers are killed in an attack on a police detachment in Balga, Gourma Province, Est Region. The JNIM claims responsibility.
20 January – Former president Paul-Henri Sandaogo Damiba is extradited from Togo to face charges of plotting a coup.
27 January – The Transitional National Assembly unanimously ratifies the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage.
29 January – The military government dissolves all political parties and repealed the laws governing them, transferring party assets to the state following a decree approved by the council of ministers.
14 February – JNIM militants kill seven Ghanaian tomato traders in an attack on Titao, Loroum Province.
22 February – JNIM militants kill four people in an attack on Manni.
15 March – JNIM militants kill 12 people in an attack on Dourtenga.
15 April – The government announces the dissolution of 118 associations and civil society groups.
22 April – JNIM militants attack a military base in Bagmoussa, Koulpelogo, killing 28 soldiers and militiamen.
24 April – The government creates a new military reserve, with the goal of training 100,000 reservists by the end of the year.
The government bans TV5Monde broadcasts, accusing it of disinformation and glorification of terrorism.
The government announces the dissolution of 205 associations and civil society groups.
26 May – Mohamed Kindo, a prominent Muslim preacher, is arrested by the government for criticising a new law that regulates religious practices, triggering protests in Ouagadougou.
26 June – The government breaks off diplomatic relations with France, with the decision taking immediate effect after a government review of bilateral ties.
List of Burkinabé submissions for the Academy Award for Best International Feature Film
25 May – Honoré Traoré, 68, general, head of state (2014)
25 May – Ben Aziz Zagré, 27, footballer (Kaisar, Shinnik Yaroslavl, national team)
27 June – Dramane Yaméogo, politician, minister of justice (2012–2014).