Local elections were held in Davao City on May 12, 2025, as part of the 2025 Philippine general election. The city electorate elected a mayor, a vice mayor, 24 members of the Davao City Council, and three district
The elections were notable for featuring the political comeback of former President Rodrigo Duterte, who was seeking to return to the post he had previously held for over 22 years, despite awaiting trial in The Hague for crimes against humanity for his role in the Philippine drug war.
Davao City, the largest city in Mindanao, the third most populous urban center in the Philippines and the largest city by land area, has been ruled by the Duterte family for most of the past four decades. The city has served as the political base for the dynasty since the first post-EDSA elections in 1988, when Rodrigo Duterte was first elected city mayor.
The 2025 elections mark a significant political development as incumbent mayor Sebastian Duterte chose not to seek reelection, instead running for vice mayor. This decision paved the way for his father, the former president, to seek a return to City Hall after serving as president from 2016 to 2022.
After Duterte's arrest by the International Criminal Court in March 2025, the Commission on Elections stated that Duterte could still be proclaimed as mayor in absentia should he win the mayoral race, even if he is still in detention at The Hague, Netherlands. The Department of the Interior and Local Government will decide if Duterte has the capability to fulfill his role while in detention overseas.
Local elections in the Philippines are held every second Monday of May, every three years starting in 1992. Single-seat positions (mayor, vice mayor and district representative) are elected via first-past-the-post-voting. The mayor and vice mayor are elected by the city at-large, while the House representative and city councilors are elected per district.
City council elections are done via plurality block voting; for the Davao City Council, the city is divided into three districts, with each district sending eight councilors. There are two other ex officio seats representing the Sangguniang Kabataan Federation and the Association of Barangay Captains; these will be determined later following the barangay and Sangguniang Kabataan elections.
Despite his detention at The Hague, Rodrigo Duterte was proclaimed winner of the mayoral election by COMELEC Davao City on May 13, 2025. The commission does not require winning candidates to be present during the proclamation ceremony.
Rodrigo Duterte (Hugpong sa Tawong Lungsod), president of the Philippines (2016–2022) and mayor of Davao City (1988–1998, 2001–2010, 2013–2016)
Karlo Nograles (Independent), chair of Civil Service Commission (2022–2024) and 1st district representative (2010–2018)
Bernard Al-ag (Independent), incumbent city councilor from the 1st district (2022–present)
Sebastian Duterte (Hugpong sa Tawong Lungsod), incumbent mayor of Davao City (2022–present)
Incumbent Paolo Duterte is running for re-election to a third term. His opponents are PBA Partylist Representative Migs Nograles and independent candidates Janeth Jabines, Rex Labis and Mags Maglana.
Paolo Duterte (Hugpong sa Tawong Lungsod), incumbent representative from Davao City's 1st district (2019–present)
Migs Nograles (Independent), incumbent representative for PBA Partylist (2022–present)
Incumbent Vincent Garcia is eligible to a third term but did not seek re-election. He fielded his nephew, city councilor Javi Garcia Campos, to succeed him. His opponents are Omar Duterte, son of 1st district representative Paolo Duterte, and independent candidate Melogen Montesclaros.
Javi Garcia Campos (Partido Federal ng Pilipinas), incumbent city councilor from the 2nd district (2019–present)
Omar Duterte (Hugpong sa Tawong Lungsod), incumbent barangay chairman of Buhangin, Davao City (2023–present)
Incumbent Isidro Ungab is running for re-election to a third term. His opponents are 3rd district councilor Nonoy Al-ag, former representative Ruy Elias Lopez, and independent candidates Lito Monreal and Dindo Plaza.
Nonoy Al-ag (Lakas–CMD), incumbent city councilor from the 3rd district (2019–present)
Ruy Elias Lopez (Partido Federal ng Pilipinas), former representative from Davao City's 3rd district (1998–2007) and 2022 candidate for mayor of Davao City
Isidro Ungab (Hugpong sa Tawong Lungsod), incumbent representative from Davao City's 3rd district (2019–present)
The first city council district, co-terminous with Davao City's 1st congressional district, is composed of the administrative districts of Poblacion and Talomo (54 barangays).
The second city council district, co-terminous with Davao City's 2nd congressional district, is composed of the administrative districts of Agdao, Buhangin, Bunawan and Paquibato (46 barangays).
The third city council district, co-terminous with Davao City's 3rd congressional district, is composed of the administrative districts of Baguio, Calinan, Marilog, Toril and Tugbok
Upon the start of their terms on June 30, 2025, amidst mayor-elect Rodrigo Duterte's continued detention at The Hague that prevented him from taking the oath of office, vice mayor-elect Sebastian Duterte became the acting mayor, while 1st district councilor-elect Rigo Duterte, who had received the most number of votes for councilor in the entire city, became the acting vice mayor. Rodrigo Duterte ultimately failed to take his oath within the prescribed six-month period. As a result, Sebastian and Rigo Duterte were sworn in as the permanent mayor and vice mayor, respectively, on January 23, 2026. Rigo’s ascension to the vice mayoralty left a vacancy in the Davao City Council.