The 2017 Northwoods League season was the 24th season of baseball in the Northwoods League, a collegiate summer baseball organization. The season concluded in August with the St. Cloud Rox winning the championship.
Two expansion teams were added to the Northwoods League (NWL) after the 2016 season, the Bismarck Larks and Fond du Lac Dock Spiders. Bismarck was the first team the league had in North Dakota since the Grand Forks Channel Cats and Minot Greenheads folded after the 2000 season. The name and branding was unveiled before the season. Fond du Lac was a new market for the league, becoming the ninth Wisconsin-based team in the NWL. Their identity was also unveiled before the season.
In 2017, the NWL had twenty teams, split evenly between a North and South Division. The Wisconsin Rapids Rafters entered the season as defending champions, having defeated the Eau Claire Express in the 2016 NWL championship series.
The regular season began in May, with the season split into two halves. The teams with the best records in the division for each half automatically qualified for a playoff berth, with two additional teams from each division added to the playoffs based on overall season record. This resulted in eight teams qualifying for the playoffs.
The playoff qualifiers for each division were as follows:
North Division - St. Cloud Rox, Eau Claire Express, Mankato MoonDogs, Willmar Stingers
South Division - Battle Creek Bombers, Lakeshore Chinooks, Rockford Rivets, Wisconsin Rapids Rafters
In the four single-elimination first round playoff games, the MoonDogs beat the Express, the Rox beat the Stingers, the Bombers beat the Rivets, and the Rafters beat the Chinooks. In the single-game divisional championship round, the Rox defeated the MoonDogs and the Bombers defeated the Rafters.
The championship series was a best-of-three set between the Rox and the Bombers. The deciding third game was at C.O. Brown Stadium in Battle Creek, Michigan. St. Cloud defeated Battle Creek 5-3 and claimed the 2017 NWL title.
Zach Zubia of the Rochester Honkers was named 2017 NWL Most Valuable Player. In 67 games (301 plate appearances), Zubia led the league in home runs (22) and RBI (62).
Aaron Rozek of the St. Cloud Rox was named 2017 NWL Pitcher of the Year. He appeared in 10 games (64 innings) and led the league with 78 strikeouts.
Bryson Stott had an exceptional season for the Wisconsin Rapids Rafters, playing in the NWL at age 19 after his freshman year at UNLV. In 342 plate appearances across 71 games, Stott batted .352 with a league-leading 100 hits. He also added 26 stolen bases.
In the 2017 Major League Baseball draft, 180 former NWL players were selected by MLB teams. Greg Deichmann was the highest-selected alum, going to the Oakland Athletics with the 43rd pick. Deichmann had played for the Lakeshore Chinooks in 2015. Other notable alums drafted in 2017 include Daulton Varsho (Eau Claire, 2015-16) and Ernie Clement (Wisconsin Rapids, 2015).
x – Qualified for playoffs based on either best record (first or second half of season) or as a wildcard due to overall record.
Qualified hitters must have minimum of 71 at-bats per season.
The 2017 NWL mid-season All-Star Game was played on 7/18/17 at Athletic Park in Wausau, Wisconsin. The following players were selected to participate in the All-Star game.
After the season concluded, the league announced its Post-Season All-Stars for the full regular season. This group included players who performed well over the course of the entire season. Several players were selected to both the mid-season All-Star Game and the Post-Season All-Star team.
The following is a list of players who appeared in the NWL during the 2017 season, en route to a future appearance/career in MLB.
The following is a list of NWL alums who made their Major League Baseball debuts in the 2017 MLB season.
NWL alums selected the 2017 MLB All-Star Game:
NWL alums awarded with a 2017 Cy Young Award:
NWL alums awarded with a 2017 Gold Glove:
NWL alums who were members of the World Series-winning Houston Astros: