Georgia Lines (born 8 October 1996) is a New Zealand singer-songwriter. She gained recognition with her self-titled debut extended play and her debut album The Rose of Jericho (2024). In 2023, she was most played New Zealand-female artist on radio. She has since received multiple awards and nominations, winning three Aotearoa Music Awards.
Lines was born 8 October 1996 in Mount Maunganui, New Zealand. She started performing from a young age, busking outside the local bank with her younger brother, MacKenzie, at the age of 7. MacKenzie has continued to support Lines, and performs as the drummer for her band.
She was the winner of Smokefree Rockquest in 2014, and met her future manager at the contest.
Lines released her debut single "Vacant Cities" in 2019, and followed it up with her self-titled debut EP Georgia Lines in 2020. A crowdfunding campaign on Kickstarter allowed Lines to travel to the USA to record the EP in Texas. In 2021, she released a follow-up single, "No One Knows", which gained popularity across streaming platforms and went on to win Best Video at the 2021 Aotearoa Music Awards.
In 2022, she won the Breakthrough Artist of the Year, and was nominated for Best Pop Artist at the Aotearoa Music Awards. She went on to release her breakthrough EP Human, which debuted at number one on the Official Top 20 New Zealand Album Charts. Its lead single "Faith" spent four weeks at number one on the New Zealand Airplay charts.
In 2023, she performed several critically acclaimed shows at SXSW; she signed with Wasserman Music after the agency offered her deal following the festival. She went on to release two stand-alone singles, "Romeo" and "Monopoly", which both achieved #1 status on NZ radio.
Lines released her debut album The Rose of Jericho in June 2024. On release, the album hit number one on the New Zealand Album charts, and number three on the New Zealand Top 40 Album charts. The album had four singles that hit number one, including "The Letter" and Wayside". "The Letter" was also a final nominee for the prestigious 2024 Silver Scroll awards.
In 2025, Lines was featured in Rolling Stone Australia's Future of Music 2025 list, and was nominated for four Aotearoa Music Awards, including Album of the Year, Single of the Year ("The Letter"), Best Solo Artist, and Best Pop Artist. She was also a finalist for the 2025 Taite Music Prize for The Rose of Jericho. In May 2025, she released a single, "Wonderful Life".