The 2024–25 Maltese Premier League was the 110th season of top-flight league football in Malta. The season began on 16 August 2024 and ended on 10 May 2025.
The league consisted of twelve teams; the top ten teams from the previous season, and two teams promoted from the 2023–24 Maltese Challenge League. Ħamrun Spartans entered the season as defending champions for two consecutive seasons. Melita was promoted and returned to the Maltese Premier League after eleven years of absence. And Żabbar St. Patrick was promoted and returned to the Maltese Premier League after twenty years of absence. They replaced Gudja United, Santa Lucia and Sirens who were all relegated after five years in the top flight, and Valletta after seventy-nine years in the topflight.
The matches will be played mainly at the Ta' Qali National Stadium and the Tony Bezzina Stadium. However, the Centenary Stadium and the Victor Tedesco Stadium will be used as well. One match-day from the Closing Round between 28 March and 31 March will be played at the Gozo Stadium thanks to the support of the Ministry for Gozo.
The new league format, which will come into being from the 2024–25 season, the Maltese Premier League will be made up of 12 teams and be split into an Opening Round and Closing Round in a way that is similar to domestic footballing systems used in South America. The Opening Round will see each of the 12 teams play each other once before the league is then split between a Top 6 and a Bottom 6, allowing for the teams in each of those splits to play each other another time.
Once the ranking is set, each team will go back down to 0 points and start from scratch in the Closing Round, where the same process will be repeated.
The league champions and the teams for UEFA competitions are determined as follow:
If both the Opening Round and the Closing Round are won by the same team:
The winners of the Opening and the Closing Rounds are declared the league champions and qualify for the UEFA Champions League;
Second placed teams in the Opening Round and the Closing Round qualify for the UEFA Conference League;
If the same team finishes second in both the Opening and the Closing Rounds, a playoff match between third placed teams in the Opening Round and the Closing Round is played for the remaining spot in the UEFA Conference League;
If the champions of the Opening Round are placed second in the Closing Round, and the champions of the Closing Round are placed second in the Opening Round:
A playoff match between the champions of the Opening and the Closing Round is played to determine the league champions;
A playoff match between third placed teams in the Opening Round and the Closing Round is played for the remaining spot in the UEFA Conference League;
Otherwise, a Final Four tournament between winners and runners-up of the Opening and the Closing Rounds is played (if the same team finishes second in both the Opening and the Closing Rounds, the third placed team with the best aggregate points is included in the Final Four tournament), with the teams seeded based on the aggregate points
Since the Opening Round Top 2 and the Closing Round Top 2 are four different teams, there would be a play-off between the top two teams from the Opening Round, Floriana and Birkirkara, and the Closing Round, Sliema Wanderers and Ħamrun Spartans.
Since the Opening Round and the Closing Round have three different teams. Balzan finish Bottom two in the Opening Round and the Closing Round therefore immediately relegated. However, Naxxar Lions and Melita had to play a decision game to determine the second-relegated team.