The 2022 edition of the United States Chess Championship took place at the Saint Louis Chess Club in St. Louis, Missouri from 4 October to 21 October 2022. As with every United States Chess Championship tournament since 2014, it was a round-robin tournament. Fourteen players were invited to compete. Besides the reigning US champion, these included the winners of the US Open Chess Championship, the US Junior Championship, and the US Senior Open Championship. The remaining players were chosen by highest invitational rating, or were selected by the United States Chess Federation (USCF) as wildcards.
The fourteen qualifiers were Fabiano Caruana, Ray Robson, Awonder Liang, Leinier Domínguez, Jeffery Xiong, Wesley So, Samuel Sevian,  Samuel Shankland, Hans Niemann, Levon Aronian, Dariusz Swiercz, Christopher Yoo, Aleksandr Lenderman and Elshan Moradi, all of whom are Grandmasters. Fabiano Caruana won the tournament without losing a game. This was his second title.
The tournament was a fourteen-player, round-robin tournament, meaning there were 14 rounds with each player facing the others once. The tournament winner became the United States Chess Champion.
The time control is 90 minutes for the first 40 moves, followed by 30 minutes for the rest of the game. There is a 30-second increment starting on move one.
Players are not allowed to draw by agreement.
The event is a 14-player round-robin, where every player plays once against every other player on the field.
Players get 1 point for a win, 0.5 points for a draw, and 0 points for a loss.
The player with the most points at the end of the last round wins the event.
While there was no tie for first place, such a situation would have been addressed as follows:
If two players tie for first a two-game 10+2 rapid match will take place. If there remains a tie, a single armageddon game will occur.
If three or four players tie for first a single round-robin in the 10+2 rapid time control will take place
If two players remain tied, they contest a two-game 3+2 blitz match. If the tie persists, an armageddon game decides the winner.
If three or more players remain tied, they contest a 3+2 round-robin.
If more than four players tie for first players will contest a 3+2 round-robin. If the round-robin ends in a tie, a series of armageddon games decide the winner.
The event features a $250,000 prize fund, distributed as follows:
Fabiano Caruana won the tournament with Ray Robson as the runner-up.