Randy Becker (born October 2, 1952) is an American former professional stock car racing driver. He competed in the NASCAR Winston Cup Series, NASCAR Winston West Series, and NASCAR Featherlite Southwest Tour.
Becker competed in the Copper World Classic seven times between 1977 and 1986, with a best finish of fifteenth. In 1981, Becker made his NASCAR Winston West Series debut at Riverside International Raceway, finishing nineteenth. He made two more starts that season, scoring a top-ten at Sears Point International Raceway and eighteenth place result at Phoenix International Raceway. Becker competed full time in the series in 1982, where he scored five top tens and finished ninth in the final standings. In contesting the full West schedule, he made two NASCAR Winston Cup Series starts at Riverside that were in combination with the West Series. In his Cup debut, he finished twenty-first, and in the second race, he finished out of the race in thirty-eighth due to engine issues. Becker competed in nine of ten races in 1983, scoring his first top five at Riverside and finishing twelfth in points. He made his final two Cup starts as part of this season, crashing out of the first combination race but finishing fifteenth in the second. After not competing in NASCAR in 1984, Becker returned for one start in the West Series in 1985, finishing twelfth at Evergreen Speedway. He also made his NASCAR All-American Challenge Series debut at Riverside, finishing fifteenth. In 1986, he competed in a majority of the NASCAR Featherlite Southwest Tour's races, scoring two top fives and six top tens and finishing tenth in the standings. He would also make his final Cup attempt, failing to qualify for the 1986 Winston Western 500. He ran only two races in the Southwest Tour in 1987, with a third place result at Riverside. He made his final five Southwest Tour starts in 1988, only running at the finish once. After no NASCAR appearances in 1989, he made his first West Series start since 1985 in the 1990 season opener, finishing eleventh. He made his final West Series start in 1991, where he finished in eighth at Saugus. In 2021, he made a start in the Northwest Super Late Model Series at the Wenatchee Valley Super Oval, finishing twenty-second.
(key) (Bold – Pole position awarded by qualifying time. Italics – Pole position earned by points standings or practice time. * – Most laps led.)