The Battles of Nabróż took place between the Ukrainian Insurgent Army and the Home Army in the Lublin Voivodeship, in Nabróż and its vicinity, May 1944, resulting in UPA success.
After a number of UPA attacks in the Lublin Voivodeship, Polish leadership was politically divided. AK commanders were blamed for heavy losses and failing to stop the Ukrainian nationalists. However, this divide only worsened the situation for ethnic Poles. Polish partisan forces made attempts to appeal to the local population. Despite this, the Ukrainian nationalists continued their attacks.
UPA launched an attack on Nabróż, the attack was repulsed and the settlement was damaged. UPA didn't make further attempts to capture Nabróż at this time, with the clashes continuing in other settlements of Tomaszów and Hrubieszów Counties instead.
On May 17, 1944, five UPA companies attacked the village of Nabróż, which was an important defense link in the Polish defensive line against Ukrainian nationalists. The attack was repelled by Polish partisans led by, among others, by Senior Sergeant Jan Opiełka ("Arab"). Due to the threat, the majority of the Polish population was evacuated beyond the Huczwa River.
UPA liquated many settlements around Nabróż. UPA renewed their attacks on this settlement. Heavy fighting took place in and outside Nabróż, which was initially developing in Polish favour. The situation was saved by the UPA reinforcements, which turned the tide of this clash. The Ukrainian side estimated Polish losses at 46 killed and several captured, Polish side estimated their losses at 12–15 killed, while UPA suffered 2 killed and 11 wounded. Other sources estimate that Poles lost 15 killed, while UPA suffered losses of about 30 dead and as many wounded.
The first two attacks ended in a victory for the Poles, but as a result of final attack, Polish forces retreated behind the Huczwa River. Fighting for Nabróż ended in Ukrainian victory. Polish-Ukrainian clashes continued in other areas and reached its peak at Narol.