The NCAA Season 100 basketball tournaments were the basketball tournaments of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (Philippines) (NCAA) for its 2024–25 season. The tournament was hosted by Lyceum of the Philippines University. Opening day of the men's tournament was held at the SM Mall of Asia Arena on September 7, 2024, while the rest of the elimination round games was held at the Filoil EcoOil Centre, then the final elimination gameday and semifinals held at the Cuneta Astrodome, then the finals at the Araneta Coliseum. The juniors' tournament started on February 24, 2025, and ended on April 15, 2025.
The Mapúa Cardinals won their first men's championship since NCAA Season 67 (1991), defeating the Benilde Blazers. Mapúa finished first at the end of the elimination round and defeated the Lyceum Pirates in the semifinals. Benilde finished second, and ousted the defending champions San Beda Red Lions in the other semifinal.
The Perpetual Junior Altas won the first juniors' championship. They defeated the La Salle Green Hills Greenies in the finals. Perpetual finished the elimination round first, with Letran, LSGH and San Beda tied for second, with the three teams ranked by tiebreakers. LSGH eliminated defending champions Letran, while Perpetual defeated San Beda. San Beda won third place, while Perpetual clinched the first basketball title for their school in the deciding game three of the finals.
The NCAA used the Final Four format used since 1997.
The NCAA mulled in moving the seniors' tournament to the second semester, and the juniors' tournament to the first semester. Reasons for the move include struggles in adjusting its calendar as a 10-team league, and for a more "unified" college basketball season; the move would have also allowed the juniors' tournament to revert to a double round robin elimination round format.
The plans did not push through, as the league opted to have the seniors' tournament in the first semester of the academic year. Unlike in the past two seasons, while men's gamedays are held five days a week, all gamedays was scheduled to be doubleheaders, except for the final playing day of the first round of eliminations, which shall be a single game involving last year's finals participants.
The NCAA appointed Ogie Bernarte as basketball commissioner for this season. However, both Bernarte and his mother fell ill as the first round of the eliminations was ending. He was replaced by Joel Ngo starting at the second round. While both Bernarte and his mother recovered, the NCAA decided to retain Ngo to avoid another transition, and instead made Bernarte a consultant.
The third place playoff, introduced last season, was originally included in the tournament. However, due to logistical issues, the NCAA decided to cancel it for the men's tournament.
The juniors' basketball tournament continued to have a single round-robin elimination round, with all teams playing one game day, with a week having at least 3 game days
For the men's tournament, the SM Mall of Asia Arena in Pasay hosted opening day, while Filoil EcoOil Centre in San Juan hosted the remainder of the elimination round. The last two game days of the first round which were originally to be held at the Filoil EcoOil Centre were then made into a tripleheader held at the SM Mall of Asia Arena. The second gameday postponed by Tropical Storm Kristine (Trami), and the semifinals was held at the Cuneta Astrodome in Pasay. The finals was then held at the Araneta Coliseum in Quezon City.
For the juniors' tournament, elimination round games are split on the Emilio Aguinaldo College (EAC) Sports and Cultural Center in Manila for Sunday gamedays, and on the Filoil EcoOil Centre for gamedays on other days of the week.
Each team can have up to 15 players on their roster, with an additional up to three players in the injured reserve list.
The ban of foreign student-athletes first applied in Season 96 (2020) is still in effect, requiring all players to be Filipinos.
The men's tournament started on September 7, 2024, with the traditional host vs. defending champion opening game featuring the Lyceum Pirates and the San Beda Red Lions in the SM Mall of Asia Arena. It ended on December 7, 2024, with the Mapúa Cardinals defeating the Benilde Blazers.
The NCAA postponed October 23 and 25 games due to inclement weather caused by Tropical Storm Kristine (Trami).
Results on top and to the right of the dashes are for first-round games; those to the bottom and left of it are second-round games.
The top two seeded teams after the elimination round have the twice-to-beat advantage in the semifinals, where they have to be beaten twice, while their opponents only once.
This season's semifinalists are identical with the previous season's, albeit with different seedings.
Mapúa clinched a semifinals berth with their win over Lyceum. The Cardinals then clinched the twice-to-beat advantage with their win against Perpetual. Mapúa finally clinched the #1 seed after they defeated Arellano in their last elimination round game. They will face #4 seed Lyceum, who qualified for the Final Four and clinched the #4 seed after they beat Benilde.
Benilde clinched a semifinals berth with Mapúa's win over Lyceum. The Blazers then clinched the twice-to-beat advantage with their win against Letran. CSB clinched the #2 seed after Mapúa won against Arellano in their final elimination round game. They will face #3 seed San Beda, who qualified for the Final Four and clinched the #3 seed after Lyceum won over EAC.
The third place playoff for semifinals losers was originally scheduled. It was supposed to be played between San Beda and Lyceum, but was cancelled due to logistical issues.
The finals is a best-of-three playoff between semifinal winners. This is the first finals since NCAA Season 80 (2004) where neither Letran or San Beda qualified, and the first since NCAA Season 85 (2009) where another team aside from those two shall win a title.
Mapúa clinched its second consecutive finals appearance. Meanwhile, Benilde qualified for its second finals in three years. This will be the first finals match-up between Mapúa and Benilde.
Finals Most Valuable Player: Clint Escamis (Mapúa Cardinals)
Coach of the Year: Randy Alcantara (Mapúa Cardinals)
The Cardinals won the championship on a 12-game winning streak, including sweeping Benilde in the finals. Mapúa won its first title since NCAA Season 67 (1991), ending a 33-year title drought.
The awards were given prior to game 2 of the finals, at the Araneta Coliseum.
Rookie of the Year: Chris Hubilla (Mapúa Cardinals)
Defensive Player of the Year: Allen Liwag (Benilde Blazers)
Freshman of the Year: Chris Hubilla (Mapúa Cardinals)
The Collegiate Press Corps names a player of the week throughout the season.
San Sebastian's Paeng Are emerged as the scoring champion, and Benilde's Allen Liwag won the rebounding title, this season.
The following were disciplined throughout the course of the season:
Pao Javillonar of the Letran Knights for playing in a ligang labas game at the Kadayawan Invitational Basketball Tournament with the Converge FIberXers; originally suspended for three games, Javillonar served a two-game suspension against the San Sebastian Stags and the JRU Heavy Bombers.
Jhomel Ancheta of the Benilde Blazers was handed a disqualifying foul during their game against the Letran Knights after hitting the back of Pao Javillonar's head. Ancheta served a one-game suspension against the Lyceum Pirates.
Jimboy Estrada of the Letran Knights after being ejected in their game against the Perpetual Altas; Estrada served a one-game suspension against the Mapúa Cardinals.
Coach Louie Gonzalez of the JRU Heavy Bombers after angrily confronting officials in their second round loss against Mapúa Cardinals; Gonzalez served a one-game suspension against the San Sebastian Stags.
John Jabonete of the Mapúa Cardinals was ejected during their game against the JRU Heavy Bombers after elbowing Karl De Jesus. Jabonete served a one-game suspension against the EAC Generals.
Marc Igliane of the Mapúa Cardinals was ejected during their game against the EAC Generals after a dangerous contact mid-air against Jhearald Manacho. Igliane served a one-game suspension against the Letran Knights.
Bismarck Lina of the San Beda Red Lions was ejected during their game against the Mapúa Cardinals after an unsportsmanlike foul against Cyrus Cuenco. Lina served a one-game suspension against the JRU Heavy Bombers.
John Jabonete of the Mapúa Cardinals was ejected during game 1 of the finals against the Benilde Blazers after an unsportsmanlike foul. Jabonete served a one-game suspension against the Benilde Blazers in game 2.
GMA Network is the official broadcaster of NCAA Season 100. The semifinals aired at GTV and Heart of Asia (HOA), while game 1 of the finals will be aired on GMA and HOA, while games 2, and 3, if necessary, will be aired on GTV and HOA. All games were livestreamed on GMA Sports and NCAA's social media accounts, while GMA News TV International holds international rights.
Additional game 2 crew: Martin Javier (interviewer and awarding ceremony presenter)
The juniors' tournament started on February 24, 2025, and ended on April 15, 2025.
Results on top and to the right of the dashes are for first-round games.
The top two seeded teams after the elimination round have the twice-to-beat advantage in the semifinals, where they have to be beaten twice, while their opponents only once.
The Perpetual Junior Altas clinched a semifinals berth after defeating the EAC Brigadiers. The Letran Squires clinched a playoff berth after their win against the Arellano Braves. On the final elimination round gameday, San Beda and LSGH defeated EAC and JRU respectively to round up the playoffs participants. Perpetual then defeated Letran to clinch the #1 seed, while Letran settles for the #2 via tiebreakers.
Perpetual qualified to its second consecutive finals after defeated the San Beda Red Cubs.
The La Salle Green Hills Greenies forced a deciding game 2 against defending champions Letran. Returning from suspension, Guillian Quines scored 28 points, including the game winner, to lead LSGH back to the finals. Letran's Daniel Padilla missed a buzzer beater to deny a third consecutive Finals appearance from the defending champions.
Letran coach Willie Miller wrote to the management committee on a supposed flop made by LSGH player Arle Podador in the last 6.5 seconds of the game; the referees ruled that replays were inconclusive.
The semifinals winners shall dispute the championship in a best-of-three finals.
Finals Most Valuable Player: Lebron Jhames Daep (Perpetual Junior Altas)
Coach of the Year: Joph Cleopas (Perpetual Junior Altas)
The Perpetual Junior Altas won their first NCAA basketball title after winning the series 2–1.
The awards were given prior to game 2 of the finals, at the Filoil EcoOil Centre.
Most Valuable Player: Lebron Jhames Daep (Perpetual Junior Altas)
Rookie of the Year: Allan Laurenaria (Mapúa Red Robins)
Defensive Player of the Year: Sean Franco (Arellano Braves)
Most Improved Player: Jericho Cristino (Perpetual Junior Altas)