The 2021 Red Sea International Film Festival was the inaugural edition a film festival in the Middle East established by the Saudi Arabian government and set in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.  The winner of the Best Film in competition was Brighton 4th (მეოთხე ბრაიტონი), directed by Levan Koguashvili.
The creation of a film festival was considered significant as cinema was officially banned in Saudi Arabia until reforms under Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman lifted restrictions with a screening of Marvel's Black Panther in April 2018. The Saudi Film Commission then announced a strategy designed to grow the film industry's revenue to $500 million.
The event came after several boycott calls by the critics, who warned that the Saudi authorities were attempting to divert the international attention from the country's poor human rights records. The Kingdom was being accused of using culture to whitewash its image at a global level. One of the critics said that without freedom of speech, the festival descended into propaganda.
The festival was originally conceived in 2019 with a plan to host the first festival in April 2020. However the COVID-19 pandemic pushed back the start by more than a year.’
The Red Sea Souk, an industry marketplace, took place concurrently, attracting over 3,000 professionals. The Souk showcases a number of projects from the Middle East, Africa and other regions to connect them with support and financing. Of the Red Sea Souk slate from 2021, 10 of them were selected for international festivals — including Cannes Film Festival, Venice Film Festival and Locarno Film Festival.
Giuseppe Tornatore, Italian director and screenwriter – Jury President
Cherien Dabis, Palestinian-American director, writer, actor and producer
Daniela Michel, Mexican festival director and founder of the Morelia International Film Festival
The festival screened 138 films from 67 countries with 16 films in the competition section.
It opened on 6 December 2021 with Joe Wright's Cyrano and closed on 15 December with the world premiere of Kabir Khan's film 83.