The 2027 UEFA Women's Under-19 Championship qualification is an under-19 women's national football team competition that will determine the seven teams joining the automatically qualified host team Hungary in the 2027 UEFA Women's Under-19 Championship final tournament.
Two national teams decided not to participate in the event, and Russia were excluded from the tournament due to the ongoing invasion of Ukraine. Therefore, including host Hungary, 52 teams entered this qualification competition. Round 1 of the qualification runs from Autumn 2026, while Round 2 will be played in spring 2027. Players born on or after 1 January 2008 are eligible to participate.
The qualification consisted of two rounds, both with teams playing in two-tiered leagues. Each round league consisted of several groups, which are played as single-round-robin mini-tournaments, with one team from each group selected as the host after the draw.
League A: 28 teams were drawn into seven groups of four. The top three teams from each group will advance to Round 2 League A; teams that finish fourth will be relegated to Round 2 League B.
League B: 24 teams were drawn into six groups of four. The group winners and the best runner-up team will be promoted to Round 2 League A; the other teams will be transferred to Round 2 League B.
League A: 28 teams will be drawn into seven groups of four. The group winners will qualify for the final tournament. If Hungary, as the host of the final tournament, wins one of these groups, the best runner-up team will also qualify. Teams that will finish fourth will be relegated to Round 1 League B for the next season.
League B: 24 teams will be drawn into six groups of four. The group winners and the best runner-up team will be promoted to Round 1 League A for the next season.
In a group, teams are ranked according to points (3 points for a win, 1 point for a draw, 0 points for a loss), and if tied on points, the following tiebreaking criteria are applied, in the order given, to determine the rankings (Regulations Articles 17.01 and 17.02):
Goal difference in head-to-head matches among tied teams;
Goals scored in head-to-head matches among tied teams;
If more than two teams were tied, and after applying all head-to-head criteria above, a subset of teams were still tied, all head-to-head criteria above were reapplied exclusively to this subset of teams;
Penalty shoot-out if only two teams have the same number of points, and they met in the last round of the group and were tied after applying all criteria above (not used if more than two teams have the same number of points, or if their rankings were not relevant for qualification for the next stage);
Disciplinary points (red card = 3 points, yellow card = 1 point, expulsion for two yellow cards in one match = 3 points);
for teams in Round 1, position in the 2025–26 Round 2 league rankings;
for teams in Round 2, position in the Round 1 league rankings.
To determine the best runner-up team in League B, the following criteria are applied (Regulations Article 18.03):
for teams in Round 1, position in the 2025–26 Round 2 league rankings;
for teams in Round 2, position in the Round 1 league rankings.
The draw for the Round 1 was held on 11 June 2026, at the UEFA headquarters in Nyon, Switzerland.
The 52 participating teams were split into two Leagues (28 in League A, 24 in League B) according to their final group standings of Round 2 of the 2025–26 competition (Regulations Article 13.01). To determine this ranking, the following criteria were followed:
higher number of points in all mini-tournament matches;
higher number of goals scored in all mini-tournament matches;
lower disciplinary points (red card = 3 points, yellow card = 1 point, expulsion for two yellow cards in one match = 3 points);
higher position in the 2025–26 Round 1 league rankings.
Within each League, the teams were allocated to four drawing pots (seven teams per pot in League A; six teams per pot in League B). Teams in the same pot would be drawn into different groups, with League A consisting of seven groups of four teams, and League B consisting of six groups of four teams.
The 21 teams of the previous season's Round 2 League A (top three teams in each group) and the seven teams of Round 2 League B (six group winners and the best runner-up) were drawn into seven groups of four teams. The Round 2 League A group winners were automatically seeded into Pot 1, the second- and third-placed teams into Pots 2 and 3, respectively. The previous season's Round 2 League B teams were seeded into Pot 4; their matches against the fourth-placed teams in their group did not count towards this ranking (Regulations Article 13.02).
The seven fourth-placed teams of the previous season's Round 2 League A and the 17 non-promoted teams of Round 2 League B were drawn into six groups of four teams. The best six fourth-placed teams of Round 2 League A were automatically seeded into Pot 1. The seventh fourth-placed team of Round 2 League A and the runner-up teams of Round 2 League B were seeded into Pot 2. The third- and fourth-placed teams of the previous season's Round 2 League B were seeded into Pots 3 and 4, respectively. The matches of the second- and third-placed teams of Round 2 League B against the fourth-placed teams in their group did not count towards this ranking (Regulations Article 13.02).
Times are CET/CEST, as listed by UEFA (local times, if different, are in parentheses).
Times are CET/CEST, as listed by UEFA (local times, if different, are in parentheses).