Ibragim Sumanovich Chuzhigaev (Russian: Ибрагим Суманович Чужигаев) is a Russian-Turkish professional mixed martial artist. He currently competes in the Light Heavyweight division for the Konfrontacja Sztuk Walki (KSW). Chuzhigaev is a former KSW Light Heavyweight champion.
Chuzhigaev made his professional debut on March 31, 2012 against Rasul Magomedov. Chuzhigaev won the fight via a first-round TKO.
His next fight came a month later, against Vasily Feyzrakhmanov. Chuzhigaev lost the fight via a first-round submission.
He returned after over a year out, when he fought Albert Ismailov. Chuzhigaev won the fight via a first-round TKO.
He fought three months later against Sergey Bobrov. Chuzhigaev lost the fight via Unanimous Decision.
Chuzhigaev had his first fight with Absolute Championship Berkut on March 16, 2014 in the ACB Berkut Cup 2014. He faced Kazakhstan's Igor Svirid. Chuzhigaev would lose the fight via Split Decision.
After going 3–1 in his next four fights, he faced Mirlan Tilekbaev on December 27, 2015. Chuzhigaev won the fight via a second-round submission, and earned himself a Performance of the Night bonus.
After going 4–1 in his next five fights, he faced Igor Svirid in a rematch. This time, Chuzhigaev won the fight via a Unanimous Decision.
His next fight came three months later, against United States's Mike Rhodes. Chuzhigaev won the fight via Unanimous Decision.
After a nine month layoff, Chuzhigaev returned in a bout against Poland's Piotr Strus. Chuzhigaev won the fight via Unanimous Decision.
After a seven month layoff, Chuzhigaev returned against Dominican Republic's Alex Garcia. Chuzhigaev won the fight via a first-round TKO.
After two years out the cage, Chuzhigaev returned on September 18, 2021 under AMC Fight Nights. He faced Evgeny Myakinkin, whom he'd beat via third-round TKO.
Four months later, Chuzhigaev faced Tomasz Narkun for the KSW Light Heavyweight championship. Chuzhigaev won the fight via Unanimous Decision, and thus claiming the Light Heavyweight title, and earning himself a Fight of the Night bonus.
His first title defense came eleven months later, against Croatia's Ivan Erslan. Chuzhigaev successfully defended his title via Unanimous Decision, and earned himself his second Fight of the Night bonus.
His next title defense came six months later, against Ukraine's Bohdan Gnidko. Chuzhigaev successfully defended his title via a second-round submission. This performance earned him a Submission of the Night bonus.
In December, 2023, Chuzhigaev vacated his title, after announcing his departure from the promotion.
Chuzhigaev was scheduled to face Sweden's Karl Albrektsson in his PFL debut on June 21, 2024. This fight, however, would never happen as Chuzhigaev dropped out due to failing to obtain a visa. Chuzhigaev would never end up fighting in the promotion.
On August 23, 2024, Chuzhigaev returned to AMC Fight Nights in a bout against Iran's Hosein Helali. Chuzhigaev won the fight via a first-round submission.
Chuzhigaev was scheduled to make his KSW return on April 26, 2025 against Rafał Haratyk for the KSW Light Heavyweight championship. This fight was cancelled due to Haratyk suffering an eye injury.
His return bout came on July 19, 2025 against Marcin Wójcik. Chuzhigaev lost the fight via a second-round TKO, and thus ending a 10-fight win streak.
His next fight came on January 17, 2026, against Maciej Różański. Różański was stepping in on short notice, after Chuzhigaev's original opponent, Sergiusz Zając withdrew due to injury. The bout ended in a No Contest (NC) after Chuzhigaev unintentionally eye poked Różański, which rendered him unable to continue.
His next fight came on July 18, 2026, in a rematch against Maciej Różański. Chuzhigaev lost the fight via a second-round TKO.