The Tata Steel Chess Tournament 2026 was the 88th edition of the annual chess tournament held in Wijk aan Zee. It was held from 16 January to 1 February 2026. The field of 14 players in the Masters section included defending champion R Praggnanandhaa and Thai Dai Van Nguyen, the winner of the Tata Steel Challengers 2025. This was also the youngest ever field of players in the annual Tata Steel chess tournament, with the oldest player, Anish Giri, being only 31 years old.
The Masters section was won by Nodirbek Abdusattorov. American grandmaster Andy Woodward won the Challengers section.
The tournament was a fourteen-player, single round-robin tournament, meaning there were 13 rounds with each player facing the others once.
The field of 14 players in the Masters section included defending champion R Praggnanandhaa, the winner of the Tata Steel Challengers 2025 Thai Dai Van Nguyen and the reigning World Chess Champion, Gukesh Dommaraju. This was also the youngest ever field of players in the annual Tata Steel chess tournament, with the oldest player Anish Giri, being only 31 years old.
For the first time, the tournament was played with a time control of 120 minutes for the first 40 moves, followed by 30 minutes for the rest of the game with a 30-second increment per move starting from move 41, matching the Candidates Tournament time control. Players got 1 point for a win, ½ point for a draw and 0 points for a loss.
Tiebreaks for the first place would have been addressed as follows:
Players would play two blitz chess games at 3 minutes plus 2 seconds per move. If three or more than four players had tied, a single round-robin would be played. If only four players were tied, a single elimination tournament would be played.
Two players still tied for first after the blitz chess games would play a "sudden death" game with white receiving 2½ minutes while black receives 3 minutes plus both players would gain 2 seconds per move. A drawing of lots determined which player had white. If the game had been drawn, the players would have switched colors and played again with that colour for the next two games, and then repeated this process until a decisive result was obtained.
All players in the Masters section are grandmasters.
This table shows the total number of wins minus the total number of losses each player has after each round. '=' indicates the player has won and lost the same number of games after that round. Green backgrounds indicate the player(s) with the highest score after each round. Red backgrounds indicate player(s) who could no longer win the tournament after each round.