Emine Dursun (born 4 January 2001) is a Turkish lawn bowler, bocce volo, and professional darts player.
Dursun played lawn bowls with three other Turkish female teammates at the 2016 World Outdoor Bowls Championship – Women's fours in Christchurch, New Zealand without success.
She won the gold medal in the bocce volo doubles traditional event with her teammate Buket Öztürk at the 2024 European Bocce Women & Mix Championship in Toroslar, Mersin, Turkey.
Dursun started playing darts when she was 5–6 years old, impressed by her father Fikret Dursun,  a former national darts team coach and Turkish Federation's chairman of the central referee board, and her brother, a national athlete. She felt great enthusiasm for this sport while they were training. She was constantly getting in between them and trying shots.
She became first time champion in the youth category at the 2012 Turkish Cadets and Juniors Darts Championships, which was her first competition. In the seniors category, she ranked third, and was selected so to the national team. Due to her young age, her application for participation at international competitions was denied. In 2017, she came second in Europe for the first time in the 2017 soft-tip Electronic Darts EDU European Darts Championship in Caorle, Italy. The same year, she won the champions title at the Steel-tip Darts Championships as the first Turkish girl.  She  won the gold medal in girls' singles at the 2017 WDF European Youth Cup, and at the 2017 WDF Mediterranean Open tournament. In 2019, she captured the gold medal in the women's singles at the Mediterranean Darts Open tournament in Kemer, Antalya, Turkey in April, and another gold at the WDF Mediterranean Cup in Salou, Spain in May,  became silver medalist at the EDU European Darts Championships, and took a bronze medal at the WDF World Junior Cup.
She took the silver medal in the singles event at the 2025 Danish Darts Open in Esbjerg losing to Lorraine Hyde in the final 5–4. In 2025, she became the first Turkish woman to compete at the WDF World Darts Championship.
Emine Dursun was born on 4 January 2001.