Calvinia was a constituency in the Cape Province of South Africa, which existed from 1915 to 1953. Named after the town of Calvinia, it covered part of the western Karoo region. Throughout its existence it elected one member to the House of Assembly and one to the Cape Provincial Council.
When the Union of South Africa was formed in 1910, the electoral qualifications in use in each pre-existing colony were kept in place. The Cape Colony had implemented a “colour-blind” franchise known as the Cape Qualified Franchise, which included all adult literate men owning more than £75 worth of property (controversially raised from £25 in 1892), and this initially remained in effect after the colony became the Cape Province. As of 1908, 22,784 out of 152,221 electors in the Cape Colony were “Native or Coloured”. Eligibility to serve in Parliament and the Provincial Council, however, was restricted to whites from 1910 onward.
The first challenge to the Cape Qualified Franchise came with the Women's Enfranchisement Act, 1930 and the Franchise Laws Amendment Act, 1931, which extended the vote to women and removed property qualifications for the white population only – non-white voters remained subject to the earlier restrictions. In 1936, the Representation of Natives Act removed all black voters from the common electoral roll and introduced three “Native Representative Members”, white MPs elected by the black voters of the province and meant to represent their interests in particular. A similar provision was made for Coloured voters with the Separate Representation of Voters Act, 1951, and although this law was challenged by the courts, it went into effect in time for the 1958 general election, which was thus held with all-white voter rolls for the first time in South African history. The all-white franchise would continue until the end of apartheid and the introduction of universal suffrage in 1994.
Like many rural constituencies across the Cape, Calvinia was a conservative seat with a largely Afrikaans-speaking electorate. It was a safe seat for the National Party through most of its existence, and its most notable MP, representing the seat from 1919 to 1938, was future Prime Minister D. F. Malan. In 1938, Malan moved to the neighbouring seat of Piketberg, and Calvinia was won for the only time in its history by the United Party, whose candidate W. P. Steenkamp narrowly prevailed over a Purified National Party opponent. From 1943 until its abolition ten years later, it was once again held by the NP, this time under former Victoria West MP P. J. H. Luttig. When Calvinia was abolished, although Calvinia itself became part of Beaufort West, Luttig moved to the neighbouring constituency of Ceres.