The Shift or Dag & nat (literally Day & night) is a Danish television drama series, which was broadcast on TV 2 from 29 May 2022. It was created by Lone Scherfig, who also directed two episodes, while Søren Balle and Ole Christian Madsen directed three episodes, each. The first season of eight episodes is set in a short-staffed maternity ward of a hospital facing cutbacks. It stars Sofie Gråbøl as head midwife Ella, who is supported by obstetrician Jerry (Pål Sverre Hagen), midwife Louise (Marijana Jankovic), intern Tine (Sara Hjort Ditlevsen) and gynaecologist Milad (Afshin Firouzi). A second season, without Gråbøl, but with two new lead actors Anders W. Berthelsen as Lasse and Ann Eleonora Jørgensen as Linda, was filmed from November 2023. The action is set two years later in the same hospital's children's ward with broadcast due in 2024 or 2025.
Ella is the dedicated head midwife on a respected maternity ward of a Danish hospital. Her team includes obstetrician Jerry, midwife Louise, intern Tine and gynaecologist Milad. Hospital administrator Michael declines Ella's requests for addtitional staff and orders cutbacks instead. This results in overworked staff, falling standards and problematic patient care.
Pål Sverre Hagen as Gjermund "Jerry": Norwegian-born obstetrics-surgeon, separated from wife
Dag & nat  was created, co-written and co-directed by Lone Scherfig for Danish television channel TV 2. Filming began in June 2021 with Sofie Gråbøl assigned the lead role of head midwife, Ella. Aside from Scherfig episodes are directed by Søren Balle or Ole Christian Madsen. It's produced by Malene Blenkov of Creative Alliance, which is co-owned by Madsen, Scherfig and Blenkov. Scenes were "was shot in a purpose-built set, and all artificial daylight... as naturalistic as possible". The first two episodes were previewed at Berlin Film Festival's Berlinale Series in February 2022. TV 2 broadcast all eight episodes from 29 May of that year.
For the second season, Gråbøl is replaced by two new lead actors Anders W. Berthelsen as Lasse and Ann Eleonora Jørgensen as Linda, which began filming in November 2023. The action is set two years later in the children's ward of the same hospital. It is expected to be broadcast in 2024 or 2025. According to TV 2's press release Lone Scherfig is joined by Nicholai Scherfig as the main writers. Lone and Madsen are joined by Henrik Ruben Genz as directors, while Blenkov returns as producer.