The Mikhail Mishustin's Second Cabinet (Russian: Второе правительство Мишустина) is the current federal government of Russia, formed in May 2024, led by Prime Minister Mikhail Mishustin.
It is the first government of Russia of which the entire composition was approved by the State Duma and the Federation Council after the 2020 constitutional reform.
The first coalition Cabinet since 2004, in addition to representatives of United Russia, it also included a representative of the Liberal Democratic Party.
As with the previous cabinet, this entire cabinet is fully sanctioned by a number of countries and organizations such as the United States, the European Union, France, Ukraine, Japan, Australia, Taiwan, the United Kingdom, Canada, New Zealand and Germany because of the Russo-Ukrainian war.
The government began to form after the resignation of the First Mishustin cabinet on 7 May 2024, as a result of Vladimir Putin's accession to a new presidential term.
On 10 May 2024, Chairman of the State Duma Vyacheslav Volodin announced that Vladimir Putin had proposed Mishustin's candidacy for the post of Prime Minister. The confirmation hearing for Mishustin took place on the same day.
Even before Mishustin's nomination, the deputy head of the United Russia faction, Yevgeny Revenko, said that the faction would support any candidate for the post of Prime Minister proposed by Putin. Since United Russia has a majority of seats in the State Duma, this means that Mishustin would become Prime Minister, even if all other parties voted against it. After Mishustin's consultations with the parliamentary factions, the leaders of the Liberal Democratic Party, A Just Russia – For Truth and New People also expressed support for Mishustin.
The Communist Party leader Gennady Zyuganov, after meeting with Mishustin, said that his faction would abstain from voting. According to Zyuganov, the communists have prepared proposals for the work of the future government, and the party will be ready to support Mishustin only if he confirms his readiness to implement them.
In accordance with the current version of the Constitution, the State Duma, in addition to the Prime Minister, will have to approve all deputy Prime ministers and most federal ministers. Their candidacies must be nominated by the Prime Minister after his appointment and approval of the Cabinet structure. At the same time, the Ministers of Defense, Foreign Affairs, Internal Affairs, Justice and Emergency Situations are nominated and appointed by the President after consultations with the Federation Council.
Mikhail Mishustin was confirmed as Prime Minister on 10 May 2024.
State Duma held hearings on candidates for the positions of Deputy Prime Ministers and confirmed them on 13 May 2024.
State Duma held hearings for the positions of Federal Ministers and confirmed them on 14 May 2024.
On 14 May 2024, the Federation Council held hearings on the proposed candidates for the posts of Ministers of Defense, Foreign Affairs, Internal Affairs, Justice and Emergency Situations. Following the results of the hearings, the Federation Council adopted a resolution on consultations.
During the hearings on Mishustin's confirmation, Liberal Democratic Party leader Leonid Slutsky proposed appointing Khabarovsk Governor Mikhail Degtyarev as Minister of Sports. In addition, Slutsky proposed appointing Ulyanovsk regional deputy Viktor Bout as the head of the agency responsible for aviation issues.
On 11 May 2024, President Vladimir Putin approved the structure of the Cabinet of Ministers. In general, the structure of the Government has remained the same. As in the previous cabinet, the new one will have one First Deputy Prime Minister and 9 Deputy Prime Ministers. Also, the positions of Federal Ministers remained unchanged. At the same time, the post of Minister of Industry and Trade was separated from the post of Deputy Prime Minister. On the same day, Mikhail Mishustin nominated candidates for the positions of Deputy Prime Ministers and Ministers.
On 12 May 2024, President Vladimir Putin nominated candidates for the positions of Ministers of Defense, Foreign Affairs, Internal Affairs, Justice and Emergency Situations. Of the five ministers, four retained their positions. At the same time, former First Deputy Prime Minister Andrey Belousov was nominated for the post of Defence Minister instead Sergey Shoygu, who was appointed new Secretary of the Security Council.
On 14 May 2024, President Vladimir Putin appointed the approved nominees for Deputy Prime Ministers and Federal Ministers.
On 17 May 2024, Mikhail Mishustin approved the distribution of duties between the Deputy Prime Ministers.
On 7 July 2025, President Vladimir Putin dismissed Transport Minister Roman Starovoyt. The reasons for the minister's resignation were not given. On the same day, Starovoit was found dead, after a suspected suicide.
On 7 July 2025, Andrey Nikitin, who had previously held the position of Deputy Minister of Transport, was appointed Acting Minister of Transport. On the same day, Prime Minister Mikhail Mishustin nominated Nikitin for the post of Minister.
On 8 July 2025, the State Duma approved Andrey Nikitin as Minister of Transport. On the same day, he was appointed to this position by presidential decree.