The Members of Parliament (MPs) who were elected in the 2024 general election and during the 59th Parliament are ranked in the list below by the beginning of their terms in office in the House of Commons.
The seniority criteria used in this article are derived from how the Father of the House and Mother of the House are selected. They are not laid down in Standing Orders but arise from the customary practice of the House of Commons. The modern custom is that the Father and Mother of the House are the male and female MPs who have had the longest continuous service. If two or more members were first elected in the same General Election (or at by-elections held on the same day), then priority is given to the one who was sworn in first. The order of swearing in is recorded in the House of Commons Journal, the official record of proceedings.
When a member has had broken service, their seniority (for the purpose of qualifying as the Father/Mother of the House) is based on the latest period of continuous service, not any earlier entry into the House.
The Sinn Féin members, who abstain from taking their seats at Westminster, have never been sworn in. They are ranked (in this list) after all other members who have taken their seats. Between themselves, they are ranked by the first date of the election, for the current period of continuous service. If they are equal on that criterion, then they are ranked in alphabetical order by surname.
This table relates to the composition of the House of Commons after the 2024 United Kingdom general election. As of 1 September 2026, it summarises the changes in party affiliation that took place during the 2024–present Parliament.
For full details of changes during the 2024–present Parliament, see By-elections and Defections, suspensions and resignations.
This table assigns a numerical rank to each of the members elected in the 2024 general election and subsequent by-elections, except for those who were elected but never sworn in, who are displayed at the bottom without a number. Members named in italics and shaded in pink are no longer sitting.
Notes reflect party changes and by-election wins during parliamentary terms; prior service as an MP; officers of the Commons; current party leaders, Cabinet or Shadow Cabinet members and committee chairs; honorary titles for oldest and youngest members and former party leaders and holders of Great Offices of State.
As of 8 July 2026, it has been updated to reflect by-elections, resignations and changes in party affiliation.