These are the results of 2025 BWF World Senior Championships' 35+ events.
Competition schedule was announced at 31 August 2025:
Japan’s Makoto Aoyama, the reigning champion, will not return to defend his crown this year. All eyes are now on the top seed New Zealand’s Joe Wu, the reigning silver medalist, along with bronze medalists Derrick Ng of Canada and Thailand’s home favorite Tawan Huansuriya, as they battle for their first-ever title. Sri Lanka’s Niluka Karunaratne and Thailand’s Suppanyu Avihingsanon are also looking to make their mark as they make their tournament debut.
Only the silver medalist from the last edition, Thailand's Benjaporn Thienrajkij is in contention this year. Singapore’s Xing Aiying, the youngest winner in U.S. Open history and a 2008 Olympian, returns to lead the field, while Chinese Taipei’s Li Ai-ting makes her debut as the top seed.
Just like the women's singles event, only the reigning silver medalists, Japan’s Yuki Homma and Masakazu Mouri, are competing in this edition as the top seed. Meanwhile, recently retired French star Brice Leverdez and Singapore’s Danny Bawa Chrisnanta are eyeing the top spot at the World Senior Championships.
Thailand’s Molthia Kijanon, the reigning champion, gives up on regaining her second title, while compatriot Vacharaporn Munkit also enters as the 35+ mixed doubles title holder. Japan’s Kanako Jigami, last edition’s silver medalist, leads the field alongside Thailand’s bronze medalists Wasamon Chokuthaikul and Suttapa Ekworrathien, seeded first and second respectively. Adding to the spotlight, Indonesia’s Debby Susanto, the 2016 All England Open champion and mixed doubles specialist, makes her debut at the World Senior Championships.
Thailand’s Nawut Thanateeratam and Vacharaporn Munkit, the reigning mixed doubles champions, are back to defend their title for a second consecutive edition. Silver medalists Derrick Ng of Canada and Taiwanese-American Pai Hsiao-ma, along with bronze medalists Chanyut Suntiparaphop of Thailand and India’s Mohamed Rehan Raju and Anees Kowsar, are all looking to claim the top spot. Making the draw even more exciting, 1× Olympian and 4× BWF World Championships gold medalist Hendra Setiawan of Indonesia teams up with Debby Susanto as the second seed. Meanwhile, Sweden’s Michel Bachtiar, at 59 years old, is the oldest competitor in the category, adding experience to the mix.
260 players from 32 nations competed at this edition of the championships:
^  Lam Chi Man was replaced by  Chao Chun-ken.