Caitlin Reilly (born September 12, 1989) is an American actress and comedian. She became known for social media videos in which she does impressions of dislikeable archetypes. She has appeared on TV shows such as Hacks, Loot, Dead Boy Detectives, In the Know and I Love LA.
Reilly grew up in the Los Angeles neighborhood of Hancock Park. Her father, John Reilly, was a longtime soap opera actor best known as Sean Donely on General Hospital; her mother, Liz (née Lily-Beth Janred), was a Swedish model-turned-businesswoman who died in July 2025; and she has four sisters. Her family runs a children's clothing store in Larchmont. After her father died in 2021, Reilly appeared on General Hospital in his tribute as his character's daughter, Annie (previously played by Courtney Halverson).
When she was ten, Reilly wanted to leave school to become a child actor, but her parents refused. She attended Immaculate Heart High School in Los Feliz, where she acted in school plays. She studied acting at the American Academy of Dramatic Arts, graduating in 2010.
After graduating from acting school, Reilly spent many years struggling to get acting work and found other employment at a nanny agency and as a waitress. She appeared in several short films in 2014 and 2015, including Love and Paint, Downstairs, and Die! Sitter! Die!: Rupert. In 2020, she took a break from acting, becoming the personal assistant to a real estate agent, but soon left the job when the COVID-19 pandemic began.
Stuck at home during the pandemic, Reilly started a TikTok account and began making short comedy videos in which she parodies a range of disagreeable types of people. Her videos went viral, with early hits including "WASP Mom" and "The Coworker You Hate on Zoom", and earned her more than one million TikTok followers before the end of the year. She drew inspiration from observations of life in Los Angeles and other personae on social media. PopSugar credited the power of Reilly's impressions to her "rotating blend of cringe-worthy facial expressions, spot-on vocal inflections, and impeccable comedic timing". She had more than two million TikTok followers by the end of the following year.
Because of her TikTok success, Reilly was signed by WME and got cast by series co-creator Lucia Aniello on the HBO comedy series Hacks, playing network executive Jessica on the second season in 2022. She then had other supporting roles, including on High School Musical: The Musical: The Series, the Apple TV+ show Loot, and the Darren Aronofsky-produced film Little Death. She became a contestant on the Dropout improv show Make Some Noise beginning in 2022.
Reilly played a recurring role as one of the dandelion sprites on the Netflix show Dead Boy Detectives, released in 2024. The same year, she voiced one of the main characters on the Peacock stop-motion series In the Know, her first voiceover role. In 2025, she hosted Netflix's podcast for the second season of Wednesday.
On April 3, 2025, Reilly announced her engagement to graphic and motion designer Evan Eggers on Instagram. Reilly and Eggers married on September 20, 2025 in an intimate ceremony at their Los Angeles home.