NCIS: New York is an upcoming American police procedural action crime drama television series scheduled to premiere on October 6, 2026 on CBS. A spin-off of NCIS, the series will feature LL Cool J reprising his character of Sam Hanna from NCIS: Los Angeles, leading a team of the Naval Criminal Investigative Service based in New York City.
Sam Hanna (LL Cool J) – a former Special Agent of the Office of Special Projects in Los Angeles – returns to his hometown of New York City to lead a team of NCIS alongside a "roguish" partner, Nick Schaeffer (Scott Caan).
LL Cool J as Sam Hanna, an Naval Criminal Investigative Service (NCIS) Senior Special Agent and ex–Navy SEAL and former second-in-command of the Office of Special Projects.
Scott Caan as Nick Schaeffer, a roguish NCIS Special Agent and Hanna's new partner.
Jennifer Beals as Robyn Wells, the director of the NCIS New York field office.
Jacqueline Byers as Addison "Addy" Ross, an NCIS Special Agent.
Shane Harper as Wyatt Sellers, an NCIS Special Agent.
Devin Druid as Sean Sullivan, an NCIS Technical Operator.
After the 2023 cancellation of NCIS: Los Angeles after 14 seasons, LL Cool J joined season 3 of NCIS: Hawaiʻi as a recurring guest star, reprising his character of Special Agent Sam Hanna. In late-2025, CBS Studios began to pitch a New York City–based spin-off focused on Hanna to LL Cool J. At his suggestion, CBS brought on R. Scott Gemmill—who had previously served as showrunner and executive producer of NCIS: Los Angeles—to write the pilot; he would draft the script during a Christmas break in production on The Pitt. Gemmill explained that he was excited by the project because it was a return "home" for both Hanna and LL Cool J, and because New York was "the burning center of the universe". Byron Balasco was brought on as showrunner. Scott Caan was cast as Hanna's partner; Caan had previously participated in an NCIS: Los Angeles crossover with Hawaii Five-0.
On April 15, 2026, CBS announced that it had ordered NCIS: New York to series as part of its fall lineup for the 2026–27 television season. LL Cool J explained that the show would "be a lot of fun", and have "a lot of sarcasm, lot of banter, lot of witty repartees, lot of New York. It's gonna be everything you need to get." In July 2026, Jennifer Beals joined the cast as the female lead.
NCIS: New York will premiere on October 6, 2026 on CBS.