Black T Igwe (formerly Black T, also known as Eric Yaw Otu) born in Obuasi (Ghana), is a Togolese singer, musical arranger, beatmaker and singer-songwriter of Ghanaian origin.
He has been based in Togo since 1999, where he actively pursues his musical activities under his record label Black Music Production now Wish Me Well Music (WMWM) and the Chronos'One Family collective.
Since childhood, he has nurtured a passion for music, despite his parents' opposition. In 2002, he began self-taught training in music engineering at Andigo Music Production in Ghana, before moving to Lomé in 2004. He then joined the Dodo Production studio team before returning to Ghana in 2006 to perfect his musical production technics. He returned to Lomé to further develop his skills with Joel Azeto at Rovers Records.
BlackT Igwe is a versatile artist, tackling social realities in a style that blends Afrobeat, Afropop and RnB. In 2004, he released his first hit single, Alonmé Mano, on the Be Real Production label, consolidating his reputation in Togo.
Back in 2009 with the singles Alognedzi Kede, which dominated the local charts and at the same time created his own studio Black Music Production and produced under the collective Chronos'One Family songs for artists such as Etane Blex and B4L.
Although he hails from the Ashanti region Black T Igwe has received awards in Togo  and even musically produced Togolese singers such as Wedy and Most Wanted,  and featuring King Mensah and other West African singers such asː Mink's (Cameroon), Bisa Kdei, Kelvyn Boy (Ghana), Shado Chris, Mike Alabi (Ivory Coast), Floby and Rich M'dali (Burkina Faso), Vano Baby and Zeynab (Benin).
Alongside his music, Black T Igwe excels as a musical arranger, beatmaker and producer, mainly in Ghana and Togo contributing to the emergence of young singers and with projects such as Tognea Negble and Kpognoede, Djaglan, Mamamouna on his record label Black Music Production or under his collective Chronos One Family.
In 2022, Black T Igwe joined KEFA Entertainment, a Ghanaian label with offices in Ghana and Togo. At a press event at Hotel IOKA in Togo, he was officially presented as the label's new artist. This collaboration aims to take his career to new heights, boosting his visibility and creativity.
KEFA Entertainment has already helped produce some landmark collaborations in 2021, such as his duet with Cameroonian Bisa Kdei in It's Over, whose official video has exceeded 270,000 views on YouTube.
2017 ː Twelve Heroes of the Year Awards (Togo)
2018 ː National Tour for the Independence of Togo
2018 ː Urban Concert at The Omnisport Stadium The Omnisport Stadium (Lomé, Togo).
2020 ː Guest at king Mensah's 24-year anniversary concert
2020 ː Concert on the esplanade of the Palais des congrès de la ville in Kara
2020 ː 12th edition of the Forum National du Paysan Togolais
2018 : Conference at MINT Hôtel and enthronement of Black T's "Igwe" [1] by Reiyel Com and Events on November 23 at the Palais des Congrès in Lomé at public request.
Four trophies by All Music Awards in Togo including the hit of the year trophy with "VVNT" (Vonvon nonto) in 2013 ːand nomination in the urban music category, male artist of the year, best beatmaker with his label Black Music Production in  2017.
Nine trophies by The Heroes 228 in Togo.
Award at La Nuit Des Imbattables in 2009 :.