The 2026 Major League Soccer season is the ongoing 31st season of Major League Soccer (MLS), the top professional soccer league in the United States and Canada. It is also the 48th overall season of a national first-division men's soccer league in the United States overseen by the United States Soccer Federation. The league has 30 clubs that are divided into the Eastern and Western conferences, each with 15 teams.
The regular season is scheduled to run from February 21 to November 7, with 34 matches for each team, primarily against opponents in the same conference. A six-week break was taken from May 25 to July 16 for the 2026 FIFA World Cup, which was hosted in the United States, Canada, and Mexico. The playoffs are scheduled to be played during an uninterrupted period in November and December culminating in MLS Cup 2026, the league's postseason championship, on December 18. The 2026 season will be the final full season played under the spring–autumn format, as MLS plans to transition to a summer–spring format beginning with the 2027–28 season; a shortened season with 14 matches is scheduled to be played in early 2027.
All MLS matches during the regular season and playoffs are planned to be broadcast on Apple TV, an online streaming service operated by Apple Inc. It replaces MLS Season Pass, which was a standalone streaming service by Apple, used from 2023 to 2025.
Inter Miami CF enters the season as reigning MLS Cup champions, while the Philadelphia Union enter as holders of the Supporters' Shield.
MLS had been expanding at the rate of nearly one team a year since 2005, when Real Salt Lake joined the league, through 2025, with the introduction of San Diego FC. Commissioner Don Garber stated that the league would put a pause on expansion once reaching thirty teams until after the 2026 FIFA World Cup. As such, the 2026 MLS season represents the first season played without an expansion team added or planned in over twenty years.
Nu Stadium opened on April 4, 2026, as the new home stadium of Inter Miami CF. In addition to their normal home venues, some teams have scheduled matches at other stadiums to increase capacity.
Note: All teams use Adidas as universal kit manufacturer. As part of Apple's broadcast contract, all MLS kits include Apple TV+ as a sleeve sponsor.
The leading team in this table wins the Supporters' Shield.