Sakra del Valle Guerrero Roldán (born 30 January 2000) is a Venezuelan model and beauty pageant titleholder who was crowned Miss Venezuela International 2023. She represented Guárico state at the Miss Venezuela 2023 pageant. She competed at Miss International 2024, where she was the 3rd runner-up.
Guerrero was born on 30 January 2000 and raised in San Juan de los Morros, Guárico, Venezuela. Her father is Jorge Guerrero, a recognized llanero musician and composer.
Sakra graduated with a Magna Cum Laude degree in medicine awarded by the National Experimental University Rómulo Gallegos becoming in a medical surgeon. Before competing in Miss Venezuela she worked at the Social Security hospital of her hometown, at the same time due to the social crisis in Venezuela she decided to provide community care in a small health establishment called 'La Enfermería' specialized in treating women with health problems.
She is also General Medicine and Microbiology professor. Guerrero is 1.73 metres tall. Sakra speaks both Spanish, Portuguese and English.
Guerrero began her pageantry career by participating at the Ferias Morros 2022 contest as Brito Figueroa Avenue representative, celebrated in San Juan De Los Morros on June 23, 2022, in conmmemoration of San Juan Bautista festivities (Saint John's Eve), where she finally won the title of Reina de las Ferias de San Juan 2022 and Juan Germán Roscio municipality queen. She also got the special awards as Miss Popularity and Best Body.
Guerrero competed as Miss Guárico with other 24 contestants and won Miss Venezuela 2023, on 7 December 2023, at the Centro Comercial Líder in Caracas. Guerrero succeeded Miss Venezuela 2022, Andrea Rubio of Portuguesa. She also got the Miss Congeniality Creole award.
During her reign, she has been a guest host for Venevisión's morning magazine Portadas al Día. She also had several cultural meetings and activities with members of the Japanese embassy in Caracas.
Guerrero has worked carrying out sessions to control basic pathologies, educational talks, donation of medicines, support in vaccination sessions and active house-to-house case searches.
As Miss Venezuela International, Guerrero competed at Miss International 2024 in Tokyo, Japan where she placed 3rd Runner-up.