The 2024–25 Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets women's basketball team represented the Georgia Institute of Technology during the 2024–25 NCAA Division I women's basketball season. They were led by sixth-year head coach Nell Fortner and played their home games at McCamish Pavilion in Atlanta, Georgia as members of the Atlantic Coast Conference.
The Yellow Jackets started the season with four straight non-conference wins before traveling to Hawaii, to participate in the Hawaii North Shore Showcase. The highlight of their early season was a 83–67 victory over rival Georgia. The Yellow Jackets won both of their games in Hawaii, including a 74–58 defeat of twenty-first ranked Oregon. They returned to Atlanta to defeat Florida A&M 98–56 before winning their ACC–SEC Challenge game by three points over Mississippi State. After a win against Mercer, Georgia Tech entered the AP Poll at number twenty-five. Their biggest test of the season came in their ACC opener against fourteenth-ranked North Carolina. The Yellow Jackets won the game 82–76 and moved up to number seventeen in the rankings. A 72–61 defeat of twenty third-ranked Nebraska saw them move up to number thirteen in the rankings. They won two ACC games before their winning streak came to an end on January 9, 2025, against Virginia Tech. The 105–94 double-overtime loss ended a fifteen-game winning streak, where the Yellow Jackets had won thirteen games by double-digits. They lost the following two games to Louisville and third-ranked Notre Dame. The team went 6–2 over the next eight games, with losses against fourteenth-ranked Duke and Clemson. The Yellow Jackets fell out of the rankings and lost four straight games to end the season. The run included losses to thirteenth-ranked NC State and two losses against ACC newcomers California and Stanford during a California road trip.
The Yellow Jackets finished the season 22–11 overall and 9–9 in ACC play to finish in a tie for tenth place. As the ninth seed in the ACC tournament, they defeated eighth seed Virginia Tech, avenging their loss to end their regular season winning streak, in the Second Round. They lost to first seed and seventh ranked NC State in the Quarterfinals. They received an at-large invitation to the NCAA tournament and were the ninth-seed in the Spokane 1 region. They lost to eighth seed Richmond in the First Round to end their season.
After the season, head coach Nell Fortner announced her retirement after six years as head coach.
The Yellow Jackets finished the season 17–16 overall and 7–11 in ACC play to finish in a tie for tenth place.  As the tenth seed in the ACC tournament, they defeated fifteenth seed Pittsburgh in the First Round before losing to seventh seed Duke in the Second Round. They received an at-large invitation to the WBIT. They were defeated by second seed Mississippi State in the First Round to end their season.