The 2024 Africa Beach Soccer Cup of Nations was the sixth edition of the Africa Beach Soccer Cup of Nations (BSAFCON), the premier beach soccer championship in Africa contested by Confederation of African Football (CAF) member association men's national teams. And the 12th edition of the beach soccer championships on the continent, including the FIFA Beach Soccer World Cup CAF qualifiers championships organized by Beach Soccer Worldwide before its rebranding in 2015.
The tournament was held in Hurghada, Egypt, with all matches taking place from 19 to 26 October 2024. It also serves as the qualification pathway for African teams to the 2025 FIFA Beach Soccer World Cup in Seychelles, with the winner and runner-up qualifying alongside the automatically qualified host team, Seychelles.
Senegal were the defending champions, and successfully defending the title.
The 2024 Africa Beach Soccer Cup of Nations qualifying round determined the eight teams that competed in the final tournament in October. The draw for the qualifiers took place on June 13, 2024, at the CAF headquarters in Cairo. The matches were held during the weekends of July 19–21 and July 26–28.
Qualification ties were played on a home-and-away, two-legged basis. If the sides were level on aggregate after the second leg, the away goals rule was applied, and if still level, the tie proceeded directly to a penalty shoot-out (no extra time played).
Host Egypt qualified automatically, while the other 14 teams competed against each other to determine the remaining 7 spots.
The BSWW World Ranking was provided in parentheses for context only.
Angola and Uganda withdrew before the first legs were played.
The following eight teams have qualified for the final tournament:
The draw took place on 19 September 2024.
The teams finishing in fourth place in the groups are knocked out of title-winning contention, receding to play in a consolation match to determine 7th and 8th place in the final standings.
The teams finishing in third place in the groups are knocked out of title-winning contention, receding to play in a consolation match to determine 5th and 6th place in the final standings.
The group winners and runners-up progress to the knockout stage to continue to compete for the title.
Winners qualify for the 2025 FIFA Beach Soccer World Cup.
There have been 106 goals scored in 12 matches, for an average of 8.83 goals per match (as of 22 October 2024).
The following two teams from CAF qualify for the 2025 FIFA Beach Soccer World Cup alongside Seychelles who automatically qualified as host.