The Mikasa-no-miya is a branch of the Japanese imperial family.
The Mikasa-no-miya was established on December 2, 1935, when Emperor Shōwa granted Prince Takahito the title of Prince Mikasa, along with permission to establish a new branch of the Imperial Family on the occasion of his 20th birthday and coming of age ceremony.
Upon Prince Mikasa's death in 2016, his wife Princess Mikasa assumed leadership of the family. Following her death in November 2024, the position of head of the family was left vacant until September 2025, when it was decided that Princess Akiko would succeed to the position. On this occasion, her mother, Princess Nobuko left the Mikasa household, establishing the Princess Tomohito of Mikasa household.
Prince Tomohito, the eldest son and heir of Prince Mikasa established his own household on November 7th, 1980, upon his marriage to Nobuko Aso. Unlike other princes of the Imperial Family who found new branches of the household, Prince Tomohito was not granted permission to do so, or a new princely title, as he was expected to eventually inherit the Mikasa household and title of Prince Mikasa.
However, Prince Tomohito predeceased his father, passing away on June 6th, 2012, with no male heir. As a result, the headship of the Prince Tomohito household remained vacant. On June 10th, 2013, the Imperial Household Agency announced that the Prince Tomohito household would be considered abolished retroactively to the date of the prince’s death, and that its remaining members would be reintegrated into the Mikasa household while retaining their staff and imperial allowances. On July 31st of the same year, the former residence of the Prince Tomohito family was renamed the “Mikasa East Palace".
Following the November 2024 death of Princess Mikasa, the Mikasa household was left without a head. However, on September 30th, 2025, it was decided that Princess Akiko of Mikasa would become head of the household.
On this occasion, Princess Nobuko departed the Mikasa household and established the Princess Tomohito of Mikasa household.
Prince Yoshihito received the title of Prince Katsura and permission to start a new branch of the Imperial Family in 1988. This was somewhat unusual as he never married or had children.
Prince Norihito received the title of Prince Takamado and permission to start a new branch of the Imperial Family upon the occasion of his marriage in 1984. The Takamado branch remains extant, although Prince Norihito died in 2002.
The principal residence of the Mikasa household is the Mikasa Palace, located adjacent to the Mikasa East Palace and the Takamado Palace, within the grounds of the Akasaka Estate, in Moto-Akasaka, Tokyo. Completed in 1970, the palace has a floor area of approximately 11,500 square feet across two floors, and served as the official residence of Prince Mikasa and Princess Mikasa from 1970 until their respective deaths in 2016 and 2024. It was vacant following the death of Princess Mikasa, but in September of 2025, it was announced that, in conjunction with Princess Akiko assuming the headship of the Mikasa household, she would move into the Mikasa palace. She moved in to the Mikasa Palace on May 7th, 2026.
The Mikasa East Palace is another residence of the Mikasa family, located on the south side of the Akasaka Estate, adjacent to the Mikasa and Akishino Palaces. Completed in 1982 as the official residence of the Prince Tomohito household, the two story, 7,300 square foot palace contains 15 rooms, plus offices and staff accommodations. While was originally named the Prince Tomohito Residence, it was renamed to the Mikasa East Palace following Prince Tomohito's death in 2012. Princess Akiko and Princess Yōko continued to live there (Princess Nobuko having been living separately since 2003) until May 2026, when Princess Akiko moved into the Mikasa Palace. Princess Yōko continues to reside at the Mikasa East Palace.